and so once i changed it that started
changing the inputs i was putting into
my body i didn't just become physically
healthier my
my thoughts changed
you know my perception of reality
and
i came across this quote from einstein
very early on and i mentioned it towards
the end of the book that the most
fundamental decision that we make
is whether we live in a friendly or
hostile universe
[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of health theory i am here with none
other than sean stevenson sean welcome
back man great to be here man any time
talking with you is awesome dude i feel
the same i absolutely love researching
you the new book
eat smarter
is really fun to see you make the
transition from sleep which is what
you're known for but really the diet and
health side is what you've spent more of
your time on i'm so i'm super amped to
talk to you about this one of the things
that i want to really go ham on today
because you cover it so interestingly in
the book is burning fat
changing your life through your diet and
the fact that people struggle with it
not because of calories but because of a
failure to recognize how individual we
are
walk me through that dilemma talk about
how you approach in the book and what
the hell people are supposed to do with
the fact that nobody is like them which
is something you mentioned over and over
in the book
help us
yes perfect man yeah so there's this
term that we're really working to
impress upon culture called your
metabolic fingerprint
all right each of us has a unique
metabolic fingerprint and this consists
of of course there's genetic components
there's microbial components
there's so much about us that makes us
so diverse there's nobody like you in
the history of humanity who has the same
metabolism and there never be anybody
like you in the future and the craziest
part tom is that there's even yourself
right now your metabolism next week is
going to be significantly different it's
constantly changing and evolving and
adapting and i'm really working to
impress us upon culture because this
cookie-cutter system
of nutrition has not has not really
given us good results if we just look at
what's happening with our society a big
part of that as you mentioned when i
went to school i went to a nice private
university very expensive they had a
great pre-med track
and i took a nutritional science class
which was an elective i didn't have to
take it i thought nutrition had to do
with fitness right so i was like okay
i'm gonna learn about how to be more fit
there was nuance there because you know
i didn't really understand the
difference with health and fitness
and so the very first day of class the
very first day of class
he said that
if you want to control your body
composition
all you have to do is control calories
if you want to control your health we
just need to manage calories calories
were the tip of the spear it was the
thing that we were taught
if we can regulate this thing this
entity then we can regulate our health
now
the big problem is kind of manifested in
culture is that there's actually these
epic caloric controllers all right sort
of like epigenetics right there's things
that are above genetic control now we
know there are things above caloric
control that actually control what
calories do in our bodies which gets
back to our unique metabolic fingerprint
in a moment but
getting that from my professor by the
way sidebar
my professor was borderline obese
himself
and he was an incredibly brilliant man
and he was doing the things that he
wasn't like secretly going and like
beer-bonging like
three musketeers or whatever like he was
teaching us at the time it was the food
pyramid right seven to 11 servings of
whole grains each day should be the
staple the the base of the diet
and in that system of thinking all he
did was he created learned helplessness
because he kept trying to do the thing
he's just like well i just need 14 to 19
servings of whole grains and i'll get it
i just need to cut my calories more
and it wasn't working
and what we know today
is that for example i'll give you one of
the the epicolor controllers
you've said this before tom you've heard
many people say this it's not just the
calories it's the quality of the
calories
just like with sleep smarter it's not
just the minutes of sleep it's the
quality of those minutes
and so now we've got a really
interesting study this was published in
food and nutrition research and i mapped
this out really well in each smarter
the research went to find out what
happened what happens when you eat a
meal of whole foods versus a meal of
processed foods
and so they had some test subjects to
consume what they deem to be a whole
food sandwich
which was multi-grain bread and cheddar
cheese all right now that's of course is
debatable but now they've got the other
group of test subjects consuming a
processed food sandwich which was white
bread
and cheese product and some folks might
be like what the hell is cheese product
that's what craft is craft singles they
can't legally call it craft cheese
because there's not enough cheese in the
cheese but as i digress so anyways
here's the most important part of this
story
the sandwiches are the exact same amount
of calories the whole food version and
the processed foods version
same amount of fats carbohydrates and
proteins on paper same sandwich it
should have the same metabolic effect
according to the calories and calories
out model but here's what happened
after compiling the data the folks who
ate the processed food sandwich had a 50
reduction in calorie burn after eating
that meal versus the people who ate the
whole food version all right so i'm
going to pause it there why how how did
they determine burn
right yeah so this is a great example a
little sidebar for everybody to
understand the pathway of fat leaving
your body or we call this caloric
expenditure
so that's one of the things we're
demystifying and he's smarter is like
where the hell does fat go where does
fat go when you lose it where does this
quote burn process happen so number one
we've got
when we're thinking about like
eliminating fat we are not we can't
indiscriminately kill a fat cell itself
when you're born you have about the same
amount of fat cells that you have today
um what happens is the fat cells
themselves get filled with contents
right in the form of these energy
packets like triglycerides and what
we're doing by the way your fat cells
can
swell up and
they can become a hundred times their
their size their original size so it's
it's crazy what fat cells can do
and so what we're what the goal is when
we're talking about pulp fat loss is
getting the fat cell to number one open
to release its contents then it needs to
get shuttled to its end station which
primarily the mitochondria to actually
be burned at this metabolic power plant
and it gives off this atp gives off
energy but what they discovered was that
about 84 of the fat that we lose is via
carbon dioxide when we breathe out
so as you describe the sandwich so first
of all the
mildly processed sandwich because even
cheese is obviously processed food
does not strike me as the ideal
barometer for whether this is accurate
so it's interesting that they're still
pretty staggering results between
mildly processed and extremely processed
and then
what is your prediction if they were to
do that with like the sean stevenson
prescribed whole food diet would that
reduction in burn from where you're at
with a true real optimized whole food
diet be even more even better
yes exactly that's the point that's the
point but that's getting back to what
are your genes expecting you to eat
because the further we get kind of
mutated and away from the the origin of
a food the more complex it becomes for
our
for ourselves to really recognize how to
use that food which created these what i
call these hormonal clogs so this is why
there was this reduction in energy
expenditure post eating that sandwich
basically their hormones
their their tissues became much more
stingy and hanging on to that caloric
energy
and fat cells not opening up
so that's number one they and this is
this is the part of the nuance like we
can't identify
the study doesn't identify right where
is the clog happening but we know it's
happening and i would argue that it's
happening throughout the entire process
right the fat cell being able to have
its intelligence to do its job correctly
because another thing even if the fat
cell releases contents
it can get reabsorbed somewhere else so
it needs to get to its end destination
and then the process of metabolism with
the mitochondria the mitochondria have
to be healthy and doing their job you
know and so so many pieces along this
process can become
uh can become damaged you know and
here's a great thing about us as humans
we're very resilient like your body can
sort itself if you just look at us like
just look at what the body is able to
take how unhealthy we can be
and still be kicking you know but also
just imagine
how good things can get as well you know
when we give our giving our bodies the
right thing so our bodies are always
seeking to get back into homeostasis
it's always looking for that
but it's also very resilient at helping
you to survive and one of the things
that i really want to bring forward as
well in this conversation of fat because
again i didn't know we would talk about
this but
in our culture we're trying to kill fat
we're trying to get rid of fat we're we
have over 200 million people in our
country are overweight or obese right
now and right now we have 43 percent of
our citizens are clinically obese
moving towards 50 half of our population
within the next couple of years it's
insane and i think you come from a
similar circumstance in my family just
say i got 30 close family members 28 of
them were obese growing up sure and
these are this doesn't mean that they're
bad people it doesn't mean that they're
not trying it doesn't mean that they
want to be obese it's just the nature of
the environment that we're in and not
really knowing how metabolism works
and so this idea of indiscriminately
killing fat
we have to do away with that because our
body fat is actually
it's pretty amazing it's actually doing
what it's designed to do it's what's
enabled us as humans to evolve and get
to this point because it was this
incredibly incredibly intelligent energy
storage system
during times when things were a little
bit leaner
and the problem is we we don't have any
lean times anymore at all so you were a
clinician for 10 years i find your
approach to talking about fat right now
very revealing and i'm interested to
know why you take it so
you're being very kind
um
as a clinician
have you learned that you have to have a
level of kindness to get people to start
doing the right things like why lead
with that instead of just saying like
because your book ends with a
prescription you tell people go do this
and look at you cage it a thousand
different ways or you know hedge your
bets saying that i don't like to
prescribe things like everybody's
different um
why are you leading with kindness when
you talk about fat
tom man i love you this is why i love
talking with you
you know it it i it is very intentional
you know i don't come from very kind
circumstances you know like when i
was in college and figuring all this
stuff out i lived in ferguson missouri
you know and i lived in uh apartment
complex sleeping on a mattress on the
floor i never met anybody who
went to college let alone graduated
except maybe professors or something
like that but you know just from the
environment that i was in man i was
inundated with
poor health and violence you know and
even myself i was kicked out of high
school my entire junior year of fighting
i got kicked out of that same private
university that i mentioned that you
know i went to in the first place i got
kicked out of that school for fighting
who does that who goes to college kicks
kicked out for fighting i just grew up
in an environment where we're taught to
solve our conflicts with violence
and
so i say that to say
part of it is
i believe that humans are inherently
good
and
but we are also products of our of our
environment of our environment but we're
creators of our environment as well when
we become aware of it and so once i
change it that started changing the
inputs i was putting into my body i
didn't just become physically healthier
my
my thoughts changed
you know my perception of reality
and
i came across this quote from einstein
very early on and i mentioned it towards
the end of the book that the most
fundamental decision that we make
is whether we live in a friendly or a
hostile universe i love that quote so
much
man like i get the chills right now
because i look i lived in what seemed
like a hostile situation
and i just started to see beauty
everywhere man i started to see
potential everywhere i start to see the
goodness in people because we're all
just trying to get our needs met and
seeing in my clinical practice nine
times out of ten the people making it to
me
they had been they weren't treated with
kindness and so i started to lead with
that and see people open up just when i
let them talk and here's a big tip for
the coaches out there
if you let somebody talk if you just ask
them questions
they will tell you the cause and cure of
what's going on with them they already
know
but we have to have the patience and the
kindness to do those things and also
knowing that
oftentimes even though they were making
the decision to put the food in their
mouth yes
but i'm coming from a place where i
didn't know that there was a difference
i just didn't know as soon as i got
access
i started to make better choices now you
didn't know what there was a difference
in the foods you were eating like the
quality of calories
exactly yeah i didn't know that there
was a difference between a fish stick
and you know wild caught salmon it's
just food it's just stuff that we eat
and we're just trying to survive
you know let alone thinking about
thriving and cognitive performance and
all this stuff we're just trying to get
by
you know but once i became aware of how
much food mattered
that's part one the awareness but part
two is also the accessibility i had to
take myself outside of my environment
tom and actually you know go to you know
mile on the other side of town to a wild
oats you know like i had to make
exceptional decisions to make those
things happen but investing back in
myself paid off dividends but most folks
don't even know that that first part is
an option
to begin with so we're leading with
kindness we're i'm assuming lowering
people's defenses we want to avoid the
morality of food i know online you
always avoid sort of bs
you talk a lot about not getting
involved in arguments over minutia and
staying like hey let's look at the sort
of big swaths of what's actually going
to make progress okay cool so we're
being kind we're i'm assuming we're
encouraging people to be kind to
themselves this is not a moral failing
if you find yourself unhealthy
what this is is some fundamental
misunderstanding but you just said that
people if you let them talk they'll
actually tell you what to what the fix
is so if they know what the fix is
why aren't they doing it
this is a great question for me there's
two parts part one is the education and
this is huge and you're a big proponent
of this
because you might know that there's an
issue with something but you might not
be educated on
why that is and also what to do about it
right and so in the instance of food
i mentioned a little bit briefly about
my indoctrination in my first
nutritional science class which again
my professor meant well but he was
teaching me something that was
fundamentally flawed because it ignores
the fact that your body is made of food
all right
my my colleagues i know the top
cardiologists in the world top
gastroenterologist top neurologist the
list goes on and on they might go to
school for 12 years to become a
cardiologist
and learn about food for two weeks
and your heart is made of food
this is the problem like you don't even
know what the thing is made of that
you're treating and then we're treating
the dysfunction with the drug right
you've got lycinapril you've got statins
you're not understanding your heart is
made from food the blood running through
your arteries is made from food the
arteries themselves are made from food
so the system itself is fundamentally
flawed so again people coming in they
might be aware that yeah i need to
change what i'm eating i know that but
they're so far removed from
understanding how powerful it is and
what to do about it because of the
cookie cutter stuff that again my
colleague might get get two weeks of
training in which is like eat a low-fat
diet plenty of fiber all this really
superficial bs
and then they're telling their patients
you need to lose weight how
how
like and so often and i talk about this
in the book our system of healthcare has
been
treating the healthcare professionals so
poorly it's a badge of honor to
absolutely destroy yourself in medical
school
and then try to pull yourself out of it
you know and just so you see the high
rates of suicide depression anxiety
obesity dying from the very same things
that they're treating
the system is flawed and it's
fundamentally because it's not
appreciated the fact that we as i'm
seeing tom right now and as he seeing me
we're seeing the food that we've eaten
it's fruit
that's really well said
okay so i'm gonna start um
putting my finger on some of the things
that i think end up causing people
problems this is obviously a world i'm
extraordinarily familiar with so put
somebody on a low enough calorie diet
no matter what those calories are
comprised of i could give somebody a
twinkie with arsenic on it and if it is
low enough in calories over time if the
arsenic doesn't kill them they're going
to lose weight they're going to lose fat
on top of a whole host of other problems
but like
what do you say to that sean stevenson
oh this is good and there's actually a
professor who did the tweaky diet he did
the tweaky experiment you know just like
see i told you guys it's just the
calories
now here's some of the fundamental
issues with that because anybody who's
just even as remotely versed
in nutrition and just fundamentals of
health because again our system of
medicine just focuses on disease
not what creates real health but like
what is this impact that it's having on
your neurotransmitters this twinkie diet
what is it doing to your pancreas what
are you making your heart cells out of
right
what is the long-term ramifications of
of a diet protocol like that and so
here's the the term that i again
impressing upon culture is epic caloric
control we mentioned the quality of food
briefly
but another one of these major
controllers
is the microbiome and i know that of
course you had folks talking about this
on the show but i want to take this to
another level because this has to do
with your body's processing
of calories and research this was
published in the journal cell really
crazy study they discovered that there's
a certain bacteria that they found in
mice that blocked their intestines from
absorbing as many calories from the food
that they ate all right now through the
lens of allopathic medicine
we just need to bottle up whatever
bacteria that is and sell that
just block people's intestines
that's it you don't block people's
intestines from absorbing as many
calories you can keep eating what you
want not understanding your body does
not operate in a vacuum there's no such
thing as side effects these are direct
effects because everything's
interconnected
one of the things i saw early on in my
clinical practice probably five years
into it i've been in this space for 19
years but 10 years in clinical practice
probably about five years into it i came
across a study because so many people
were coming in statins were like
they were the hottest thing on the
streets all right because that everybody
was coming in on a statin
and there was a study that came out
revealing that
folks taking a statin had a 30 increased
incidence of having diabetes now all
right something was happening
with
creating abnormal blood sugar you know
does this have to do with the beta cells
does it have to do with insulin
sensitivity
you know that was open for debate but we
knew that it was happening
and so
when you when you try to treat that
symptom with okay we just need to get
everybody that's bacteria is this going
to affect my bacteria's ability to
produce b12 is it going to affect my
bacteria's ability to produce
short-chain fatty acids to protect my
gut lining and prevent autoimmune
conditions
we can't think about in those terms so
here's where we do think about it all
right so they discover this bacteria now
we transition this over to humans
this was from researchers at the
weizmann institute
so tom in my practice i could have
somebody send out for a stool sample
never even see them a day in my life
i can get their report back and know
with a high degree of certainty whether
or not they're obese based on the makeup
of their microbes that is insane
and so the research questions really
fast while you're on that side note what
comes first
do you just have a bad roll of the dice
and uh you came out of your mother's
womb and the microbiome that you formed
happened to be obesity
um
promoting or is it your diet the
microbes respond to the fact that you're
eating cheetos and all that kind of
stuff all your cheese like products
uh yeah which which comes first
it's a both end world it's a bold and
world time because we are getting that
download specifically from our mother
but one of the studies was done in
identical twins all right you don't get
more similar of a person to study or
people to study to see the effects of
one thing or the other than identical
freaking twins man when they find a twin
whose bacteria cascade is associated
with obesity insulin resistance
and
and weight gain and then they find i
know one of the other twins who has in a
microbiome who's that's associated with
leanness
right and they track them over years
that they're they're in the same
household eating the same diet but the
twin who has the microbiome with the
cascade associated with obesity became
insulin resistant more often became
obese more often than their lean
microbiome twin right and the microbiome
shifts
based on our choices based on our
lifestyle because one of the number one
drivers and i broke this down any
smarter as well
what we discovered was that folks who
are eating more of a
traditional diet their hunter-gatherer
closer to that type of diet they have
upwards of four times greater diversity
in their microbes than the average
person in the western world we're losing
our diversity like crazy
and a big part of this is we're not
feeding the microbes their preferred
food source for them to stick around in
the first place
all right so these are what we call
quote prebiotics and anybody can go to
google and look in prebiotic foods but
that's limited thinking like we've got
asparagus jerusalem artichoke art gun uh
onions and garlic that's small small
potatoes
here's the truth
every single food has prebiotic capacity
every single real food for some strain
of bacteria and there might be a food
that your ancestors have been eating for
centuries that is suddenly stripped away
by a diet choice or just by by proxy
just by the environment that you're in
and suddenly you don't have that
bacteria getting fed anymore it has no
choice but to become extinct in your
system right and so what the researchers
discovered was that the number one
weight as your bacteria diversity goes
down your rate of insulin resistance
goes up bacteria diversity goes down
your rate of diabetes goes up your rate
of obesity goes up your rate of insomnia
goes up
as your rate
of
microbes goes down all right we know
that they have an inverse relationship
the number one way to reverse and
improve the diversity of our microbes is
just so simple is to just simply
increase the diversity of foods that
we're eating now why does that work i
get why if i had depleted a population
and i can bring back what is there but
if it's truly gone extinct
is there dirt on the food like how am i
repopulating if i'm not taking a
supplement of some kind with a probiotic
in it
yeah this is a great question as well so
number one
uh in my practice i put people on
probiotics so frequently and we would
get like these credible probiotic
formulas some of them take like
two years fermentation process like
wizards do spells over them all kinds of
but we were missing the point
because they're not able to colonize it
to populate in the gut
to do all the cool things that they can
potentially do if
they're not given their preferred food
substrates they're not giving their
prebiotic sources
and so to answer that question yes we do
want to have sources of probiotics
coming in
preferably through food right and we do
go through that
but also
the most important thing again is not
missing the point and this is the this
is the point
when you eat a food when you would just
say we eat a berry when you're eating
that berry you're eating a prebiotic and
you're eating that berries microbiome as
well
you're taking that on yourself so it is
coming along with
probiotic with bacteria
it's just the nature of eating real food
same thing with an avocado you're eating
that avocados microbiome
if you eat some kale you're eating that
kale's microbiome if you eat some
walnuts you're eating that walnuts
microbiome so we have this limited
thinking that i need probiotic
you know some kind of special probiotic
food i need some special probiotic
supplement
no
we're really missing the point here food
already has the thing
but for many of us especially where we
are we can like leverage because i know
some people have got some wonderful
benefits adding in some fermented foods
absolutely but we don't want to miss out
on this prebiotic because prebiotics are
needed for the probiotics to make
postbiotics
all right so this is when they're making
vitamins minerals short-chain fatty
acids in you for you it's this beautiful
symbiotic relationship so i hope that's
what
it does i want to draw a straight line
from the question about hey you can eat
a twinkie and if your calories are low
enough you are going to lose fat
and
the punch line of what you just said so
here's what i'm taking away from that
you actually can
for sure i promise you you can lose
weight eating anything if you keep your
calories low enough now some foods
because of the signaling effect of
calories and not all calories are the
same you may have to restrict tighter
and tighter and tighter on certain foods
than you would on others and so
yes you can lose weight eating a twinkie
diet but as you mentioned not only do we
have those kind of effects but your
blood vessels and all of that other
stuff are made up of the very things
that you eat and in processing they're
like at a cellular structural level and
a signaling level
you're
changing the material that you're taking
in
and it's like i get why people are
obsessed with like getting shredded and
being in good shape but when you begin
to understand that that is
ah thing that happens and that there's
actually a whole host of things that
happen
then people begin to think about it the
right way now what i found amazing about
your book
is you call out directly
hey
boys and girls don't worry about whether
you're paleo vegan uh carnivore what
none of that matters
listen to your body
yeah now is
what i want to know is what the hell do
you mean by that
we're right now there's a lot of
infighting over minutia as you mentioned
that i said earlier
um
and these wonderful diet frameworks
these are my friends you know the top
person in each of those
and they the reason that they
write these books and that they have
these positions is that they see results
for their patients they see results for
the people that they're working with
they're not trying to be negligent
they're not trying to ignore the data
they're helping people but what's also
overlooked is that there's a large
percentage of people that each of their
diet frameworks is not helping and
that's the truth
and a big part of that is
many of these diet frameworks even
though they can be wonderful
they can also imprison you and they can
leave things out make things off limits
that you might need that somebody else
doesn't need right but also it might be
protecting you for something you know so
there's there's balance there but we
have to have a little bit more
agency over our thoughts agency over our
choices
and this gets into the discomfort of
becoming more educated about who we are
you know unfortunately
there's no easy way around this you know
if you're really going to thrive and to
be the best version of yourself we have
to learn how we work but the thing the
thing that i want people to understand
and just kind of going back i gotta
really wrap this point up
because you really like made that hard
line point about this with the twinkie
diet
those researchers at the weizmann
institute who
understand about what's you know the
bacteria in mice they took bacteria
samples fecal samples which fecal
transplantation is like one of the
hottest things on the street as well
it's super weird but it is
but they take they took these fecal
samples from folks who had a bacteria
cascade associated with obesity and
implanted it into lean mice
they took
another set of fecal samples from human
subjects who had a bacterial cascade
associated with leanness and implanted
that into lean mice
those mice stay lean
the mice who received the implants from
the folks with the bacteria cascade
associated with obesity those mice
became insulin resistant
they gained weight and gained body fat
not because of calories not because they
changed what they were eating because of
the bacteria
these principles supersede any of the
ideas that we carry about
just managing calories if you just get
into a caloric deficit because the mice
are already eating the same thing yet
they're gaining weight and i've seen
again many other people listening
especially if they're in healthcare
people coming in they're already
at
a day diet you know and maybe they're
six feet tall
and their weight loss has been stuck
and then we
once we can have a certain level of like
stepping away and not thinking we have
all the answers and listen to the person
do some investigation we might find out
there's an underlying autoimmune
condition a thyroid issue we might find
out that inflammation is the causative
factor because as you mentioned we talk
about that as well there's so many
things that control what calories do
not to say that being in a caloric
deficit can't just make weight fly off
of somebody absolutely but even within
that there are things controlling that
person's metabolism that's going to
outpicture different results from
somebody who might be at the exact same
height and weight starting off as them
where i want to keep pushing on though
is this notion of self-awareness and how
you listen to your body so
i'll give you an example when i first
started working out i had been working
out for probably for about eight months
before i realized that you could fire
your lats like you could actually send a
signal to that part of your back and it
would pull your arms down and you have
this
understanding of whoa
when i fire that muscle i feel it i can
actually feel that muscle contracting
and i now have a level of control
with food it's the same but it's like
steering a boat when you steer a boat
you do something nothing happens and
then six seconds later the boat moves so
it is very hard to drive a boat because
you have to account for that leg food is
insanely complicated if you eat one
thing and you're in a good mood you'll
be fine you eat the same thing in a bad
mood and it upsets your stomach it's
so complicated i mean that's just one of
a bazillion different ways
but people don't
learn to connect i ate this thing and i
feel this way i'll give you example from
my own life about
six months ago
sean i'm i'm always sharp and i was just
like
just in the middle of the day all the
time and i was like way out of it and
then finally i connected that feeling
with the word people used for brain fog
i had never understood what people meant
by brain fog and so all of a sudden i
was like is this brain fog and i was
like oh my god this is brain fog i don't
think i'm tired this is if it's brain
fog it is almost certainly something i'm
eating i end up tracking it down it was
pecans
i have no idea why
i can eat pecans but when i eat them
every day all of a sudden because i'd
gotten into this routine where one of my
meals was made with a lot of pecans it
was amazing
and
over time and that was the worst part it
probably took
four months of me eating those that meal
almost every day to get to that point
but then once i was there until i
removed them from my diet i couldn't
shake it no matter how much i slept
caffeine nothing i just felt that brain
fog stopped eating them was gone in like
48 hours that's so crazy and this is the
thing is it can be something so small
and subtle like that and what you're
bringing up and how do we kind of get
this inner guidance system back online
first of all it's an acknowledgement
that it exists because in our system
we are so focused on objective measures
which i'm very analytical so i'm super
into that stuff
but
being able to track the data the things
that everybody else can measure
isn't even remotely close to how
powerful your subjective experience is
tell me something that matters more than
how you feel
i'll wait you know this is the thing
this is the most important barometer of
everything in our life
and yet we get we pay so little
attention to it
so basic metrics that we can pay
attention to when we eat a meal just
seeing how does that make me feel how
does the digestive process
feel
but so i think so often as well we start
to have these
alarms that go off when we eat certain
things
and we just keep hitting the snooze
button on it like ah you know
this fatigue is normal this
stomach discomfort we get these
different
responses your body's giving you
feedback that something's wrong
something's not right here and yet we
accept it as normal and so that inner
intelligence we start to create a lot of
static on the line
all right so that's part of it is being
able to clear off the static on the line
and i want to add another layer here
just with a little bit more science on
what that static on the line can look
like
there's this wonderful ex i talk about
the science of flavor in each smarter
and
there's this wonderful occurrence of
something called post ingestive feedback
right post ingestive feedback and
essentially through our evolution
whenever we would eat a food
your body your your brain your your
tissues are essentially like taking
notes like okay you know we'll just say
just found some wild berries you ate i
got some copper from this i got some
selenium i got some of some amino acids
i got a little bit of
uh omega-3s from the seeds
your
your body is taking notes that when you
eat that food is connecting a flavor
sensation to those nutrients
and so now when you start to become
deficient in those nutrients
your body can submit a craving a craving
signal to go and eat that food to get
those nutrients back to where we need
them to be now here's the problem
processed food manufacturers have really
muddied up the waters of this
post-digestive feedback because now we
can make things taste like different
things
all the time and it doesn't have to be
exact but it's just enough to create
enough
biological interference that we don't
even have that intelligence anymore
right so
a big takeaway from today and just
overall for everybody is that chronic
nutrient deficiency
leads to chronic overeating
chronic nutrient deficiency
leads to chronic hunger
when we're having these deficiencies
part of the big reason why we're having
uh haphazard hunger and cravings our
bodies are driving us it's not just the
fact that we're addicted right that's
that can be dismissive but they're just
addicted to sugar
well they're probably deficient in damn
near every single nutrient that they
need to actually thrive all right and
your body is going to keep compelling
you to eat more to get those things in
that's how we evolved
and so
having that process you know again to
become kind of skewed and twisted up
it just
it makes another layer of complexity of
trying to figure out this inner
intelligence so to to help with this and
i provided some very specifics in the
book but again i'm very much on we've
got to experiment for yourself
but one of the things that was found to
help to reduce
the impact of hyper palatable foods
on our brain
funny enough is chlorophyll all right
chlorophyll
yeah chlorophyll is found to help to
reduce the urge to eat hyper palatable
foods and also to reduce neural
inflammation
okay do you take it as a supplement
so just in foods you know chlorophyll
anything green is going to be a good
source of chlorophyll so of course green
leafy vegetables but then we've got
these super dense sources of chlorophyll
like chlorella you know they even got
its name chlorella from the high
chlorophyll content spirulina but then
you also get these other benefits there
like with spirulina is one of the foods
clinically proven
to reduce neural inflammation
and why am i bringing this up where's
the interference and being able to know
how we feel and what we need
tom i want everybody to get this because
you're not going to hear you're going to
hear this in a few years
but right now you're here here first
with tom bilyeu
one of the biggest epidemics we're
facing today
is neural inflammation
all right inflammation of the brain and
one of the studies that i talked about
in the book this was published in the
annals of the new york academy of
sciences
they they reported that
specifically hypothalamic inflammation
and your hypothalamus is like
this is like your body's internal
thermostat
we're literally regulating what your
metabolic rate is your brain doesn't
give a how many if you're trying to
calorie count
your hypothalamus can tell your gut to
reduce the absorption of calories that
you just ate
your hypothalamus can tell your gut to
increase the absorption of calories from
food you just ate
all right these things are epic allure
controllers superseding that normal
function so what they discovered was
that
hypothalamic inflammation
is one of the
biggest driving forces of obesity
because it's throwing off our metabolic
rate all right
and here's the other side obesity is one
of the biggest causes of hypothalamic
inflammation
and it's just creating this
terrible loop where people can't get out
of it
and again i know my friends you might
have these diet frameworks but if we're
not explicitly
helping people to reduce the
inflammation in their brain we might
just be spinning our wheels here but
many of these wonderful diet frameworks
though that are really worth their salt
they're accidentally doing it anyways
they're helping to reduce neural
inflammation one of the foods that was
again clinically proven to reduce
inflammation neural inflammation
funny enough and i i'm this is not an
advocation for this food it's just the
data exists i was shocked
at auburn university found that
oleokanthal rich extra virgin olive oil
is incredibly effective at reducing
brain inflammation and it's been found
to repair the blood-brain barrier
right your internal security system
basically keeping things out of your
brain that create more inflammation that
gets damaged over time especially from
you know excess sugar and the list goes
on and on but wow i didn't know olive
oil can do that that's really
remarkable and what they found was this
two to three tablespoons a day
and
how do you go about that there's nuance
there too you know um olive oil if
you've ever seen it in the stores nine
times out of ten is in dark glass this
is because it's photo sensitive
light can damage olive oil
all right and so you don't want it to be
in clear plastic that's already nasty
it's already messed up all right number
one and also is this should bring up
well should i be cooking with it
you can
and it might be healthier well
definitely healthier than these highly
processed seed oils you know canola oil
and
veg quote vegetable oil
but
very low heat but ideally and folks
traditionally we're going to use it as a
finisher so your meal is finished plated
and you drizzle some olive oil on use it
to make dressings people put it on
sourdough bread talk to me about that so
massive individual variability nobody is
ever going to be like you again nobody's
had digestion like you nobody ever will
have digestion like you so you are doing
an n of one experiment whether you want
to or not how do people figure out what
to eat
so this gets down to a principles and
not
not written rules not def definitive
points because again everybody is unique
so there's going to be principles in
every diet framework that are going to
make them successful and then there's
going to be things that can make any
diet framework
go terribly wrong
right so what we want to do is
eat in a way that number one and i just
mentioned this earlier to help to reduce
inflammation so that these internal
guidance systems can be get back online
this inflammation is it's a really it
sounds kind of hooky tom i don't know
about you but it just inflammation
inflammation
but it is a real problem because
inflammation number one is not a bad guy
that's number one we need inflammation
it's a functional part of our immune
system or part of our healing a part of
just cellular processing period we don't
want no inflammation is a part of growth
however
chronic inflammation inflammation where
it's not supposed to be
like this heightened neural inflammation
can really really mess us up
so the
biggest driving force is for most of us
today with inflammation specifically gut
inflammation is the consumption of
pesticides herbicides rodenticides
and you know i get i did share one of
the studies in the book finding
conclusively a meta-analysis that
pesticides do in fact not only create
inflammation in the gut but create
abnormal
uh
gene expression from your microbes right
your micro most of our if we go gene for
gene most of the genes we carry in our
bodies are not ours
all right we're 99
genes of other you know our
bacteria cascade that we're carrying
around with us and so these things
damage our gene micro the microbial
expression of our jades all right so
this is not a small thing
and
we've come to accept it as normal
right now we have
literally thousands of pesticides have
been approved by the epa so-called
environmental protection agencies
supposed to be protecting us
many of them have been recalled many of
them are actually caught up in red tape
right now like
chlorpyrifos for example that's been
found
study after study to lead to
neurodegenerative diseases specifically
for development of babies and creating
brain damage and
creating skyrocketing rates of
miscarriages you would think it would be
it would have been gone it's happened so
many times it's disgusting because with
these companies it isn't innocent until
proven guilty
it's
innocent until it cuts into their bottom
line enough the lawsuits
because it's just you know it's just
business as usual they already have a
certain amount of set aside for all the
damage it's going to cause so it when
we're talking about avoiding pesticides
this isn't a
it's not a trendy thing that i'm talking
about here these chemicals are not
designed for human consumption
but the premises is generally regarded
as safe because we're a bigger organism
we're bigger than the little pests that
they're trying to kill
but things bioaccumulate in our tissues
and number one and number two we're made
of little things smaller than those damn
pests
we're made of these things and they're
damaging our microbes they're damaging
ourselves so do we avoid that by eating
organic
organic there's nuance there with
organic but it's going to be generally a
good step to make and we can do that
ourselves and as we continue to demand
it there's going to be continue to
change what's available in the market
for sure so and also a way around that
because again not having a lot of money
i would start to go to farmer's markets
there was a farmer's market in ferguson
and meet the farmers ask them hey are
you guys spraying on your
lettuce you know and they're like
absolutely not you know and just talking
to them learning
you know there's many and it's much less
cost right i can get three times the
amount
of lettuce that i was buying at whole
foods or whatever there for the same
amount of money so
um so yes avoiding the things that are
damaging
this internal intelligence that are
our
our metabolism right so that's just one
but then adding things in
as well that help to reduce inflammation
so what does that look like one of the
most important tom and i'm gonna say
this again and again because it says
this has to do with metabolism but also
it has to do with our sleep quality it
also has to do with our cognitive
performance and i know this is important
for you as well
and this is the need to make sure we're
getting in plenty of dha and epa all
right this is so freaking important i
don't even want this to if anybody does
anything from this episode i want to
make sure that you're getting in
enough omega-3 fatty acids in the form
of dha and epa so
number one
dha and epa have express lanes if you
want to think about the blood-brain
barrier being like a toll booth they
have express passes to get into the
brain like your brain sucks them up like
in droves because they're needed for
structure of your brain cells
omega-3s function as
structural fats in your brain creating
plasticity
creating stability and signal
transduction so your brain cells can
actually talk to each other
without omega-3s goes wrong real
fast to the degree one of the craziest
studies in the book
they found that the folks who had the
lowest intake of dha and epa
had the highest rate of brain shrinkage
all right
your
your brain literally shrinks
rapidly if you're not getting these fats
in and so what it was was just under 1.2
teaspoons a day
anything under that
increase the rate of brain shrinkage
what are the best three foods or
supplements to get your
dha and epa
okay perfect
food first fruit first the journal
neurology found that folks who consume
just one seafood meal per week do in
fact perform better cognitive skills
tests i think that's a direct one-to-one
response to those omega-3s
but if you if you're not taking uh if
you're taking a vegan vegetarian
protocol i've got news for good news for
you too but food first and then of
course there's grass-fed beef in that
same spectrum has omega-3s a high ratio
of omega-3s uh eggs
the best food source though tom
is not the fish the fatty fish but the
fatty fish eggs so salmon roe
and caviar can have three times more dha
in epa than the fish itself and then
we've got from there most of the studies
done on dha and epa
is done via fish oil all right so i did
share some studies in the book that are
just really shocking when it comes to
fish oil but then from there the next
rung down is krill oil right krill
that's the microscopic shrimp super
dense and astaxanthin which makes
your body absorb omega-3s even better
it's incredible
that might be for somebody who's doing a
vegetarian protocol wherever that lies
on your ethics krill oil might be a
savior for your brain
if anything everybody today even if
you're taking a vegan protocol please
get yourself an algae oil all right high
quality algae oil it has the dha and epa
there
but we don't have clinical studies now
to see its effectiveness
but we do know that it's there and i
just don't want you to wait around for
that data dha is so important for your
brain just to be clear
this is the plant source is ala right
that's what you find in chia seeds and
flax seeds and hemp seeds i would have
patients get flax seed oil for years i
was missing the point
it's not the same as dha and epa but
it's so important for your brain that
your body can convert some ala into dha
but you can lose depending on your
metabolism your unique metabolic
fingerprint you can lose 90 in the
conversion process
and so you'll have to eat
five bags of chia seeds a day to get
what your brain needs you know it's just
not doable
and plus you probably want to leave the
bathroom at some point
so
that's that's that part and i also want
to share this really quickly with uh
omega-3s and omega-6s this was a study
and this was published in the journal
nutrients and it found that a large
increase in the ratio of omega-6s in the
diet compared to omega-3s directly
increases our risk of obesity but here's
the most important part listen to this
this another study and
this was highlighted and then i broke
this down i'm getting giddy right now
another study highlighted in smarter
found that an imbalance in omega-6s to
omega-3s leads to dysfunction of your
hunger-related hormones and increased
fat storage
even with calories being the same
people with a higher intake of omega-6s
gained more weight
and more body fat and had more
dysfunction to their hunger-related
hormones all right epic caloric
controller
omega-3s help to reduce inflammation
omega-6s are not bad but we need more
omega-3s right now because we've become
such a mega-six dominate society
man it is a big topic my friend that you
cover extraordinarily well you have a
gift you know you're always very humble
about it but you have a gift of taking
these incredibly complicated topics and
making them accessible to people your
book is fun to read by the way lots of
fun jokes and references
and a thread that makes it easy to
follow where can people pick it up where
can they engage with you more
thank you so much tom that really does
mean a lot and that was the mission
behind it
uh so people can pick it up
anywhere books are sold bam
barnes noble uh amazon all that good
stuff and also eat smarterbook.com we
did a little video mini course so
there's 10 videos to highlight 10 foods
that have some of the most clinical
evidence on kind of helping us optimize
our fat loss related hormones so that's
where people can find the book
and i appreciate you so much tom people
where they're listening to this amazing
podcast
one of my favorite podcasts on earth one
of the few that i listen to you can find
my show as well it's called the model
health show and we do some cool stuff
there too no question
awesome guys check him out everywhere
you can i promise you will be richly
rewarded and speaking of being rewarded
if you haven't already be sure to
subscribe and until next time my friends
be legendary take care thank you guys so
much for watching and being a part of
this community if you haven't already be
sure to subscribe you're going to get
weekly videos on building a growth
mindset cultivating grit and unlocking
your full potential